Kommander Upgrade including air-gapped scenarios (#4201)
mesosphere/dcos-docs-site: pages/dkp/kommander/2.2/dkp-upgrade/upgrade-kommander/index.md

menuWeight: 20
excerpt: Steps to upgrade Kommander via CLI
beta: false
---
 
This section describes how to upgrade your Kommander Management cluster and all Platform Applications to their latest versions in networked, air-gapped and on-prem environments. To prevent compatibility issues, you must first upgrade Kommander on your Management Cluster before upgrading to DKP.

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE: </strong>It is important you upgrade Kommander BEFORE upgrading the Kubernetes version (or Konvoy version for Managed Konvoy clusters) in attached clusters, due to the previous versions' incompatibility with 1.22.</p>

## Prerequisites

- [Download][download_binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.

> - For air-gapped environments only: Download the [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle].  

Reviewer: Catalog Applications are an enterprise only feature now, will we need separate instructions (marked as enterprise) on upgrading an airgap install with catalog apps?

Also,  we'll need to mention downloading the kommander applications chart bundle (step 4 [here](https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/#install-on-konvoy))

Author: @cbuto AFAIK, upgrading catalog apps will be a straightforward (short) step and therefore will live in the catalog app section (we will link to that page from the upgrade overview). Could you please confirm that this is true @Colin1841, and that we are already linking to that bundle?

Reviewer 2: The upgrade Catalog apps procedures are documented here: /kommander/2.2/projects/applications/catalog-applications/index.md
We should be able to drop a note & hyperlink from the upgrade sections.

> - For air-gapped environments only: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]

Reviewer: we'll need a step for downloading the latest kommander application application definitions (step 3 [here](https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/#install-on-konvoy))

Author: @cbuto , I added the info on downloading Kommander application definitions and charts bundles, thank you for the info! Could you please check that lines 22 to 32 are correct? In that order and for air-gapped only?

Reviewer: looks good to me! yep that would only be required for air-gapped install/upgrades

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s_access_to_clusters].

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash

>     dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle bundle.tar.gz

Reviewer: I think this will need to include the chart bundle and the updated kommander application repo 🤔. maybe @gracedo or @mikolajb can confirm?

```bash
dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_${VERSION}.tar.gz
```

Reviewer 3: @takirala can you look this one over?

Author: So we have 3 different options here, since @makkes also proposed: 
`dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle bundle.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz`

Reviewer: @gvasquezvargas both are correct! it just depends on what the bundles are named when they are downloaded. I'd suggest we stay consistent with what we document on this [page](https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry) if possible.

On that page we have example commands that end with the bundles looking like:
```
--kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_${VERSION}.tar.gz
--charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz
```

Reviewer: @gvasquezvargas and I synced up about this.

If we use the commands from the [install page](https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/#install-on-konvoy) for downloading the bundles. Unfortunately, linking directly to the download links isn't working (and users may be more privy to downloading via the CLI anyway).

```
export VERSION=v2.2.0
```

Download Image bundle (we could link directly to this [page](https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry))
```
wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/${VERSION}/kommander_image_bundle_${VERSION}_linux_amd64.tar.gz" -O kommander-image-bundle.tar.gz
```

Download Kommander Application Definitions: (this doesn't have a direct link to an existing doc)
```
wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/${VERSION}/kommander-applications_${VERSION}.tar.gz"
```

Kommander charts bundle: (this doesn't have a direct link to an existing doc)
```
wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/${VERSION}/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz"
```

Then users can copy/paste those and end up with the upgrade command being:

```
dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_${VERSION}.tar.gz
```

Reviewer 4: what about 
- charts bundle for `dkp-catalog-applications`
- `dkp-insights-catalog`

i guess insights isn't ready yet but we can have a placeholder comment to add it in later?!

## Prerequisites

- [Download][download_binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle].  
- For air-gapped environments only: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the Kommander charts bundle: 

```bash
wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz"

> ```

Reviewer 5: This is mentioned twice now, here and in the bullet above.

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s_access_to_clusters].

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle bundle.tar.gz
    ```

    For non air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander
    ```

>     <!-- A confirmation message appears once upgrade is complete. -->

Author: By editing this line, I unintentionally solved conversation. @vespian to provide sample output

> 1.  <!-- Pending step: if confirmation message cannot be added on time, document a way to check the status of the upgrade in Management Cluster. -->

Author: By editing this line, I unintentionally solved conversation. 
@gracedo could you please provide workaround or input (and output?)

Reviewer 3: There should be a confirmation message for kommander upgrade cmd so we don't need this one

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE: </strong>It is important you upgrade Kommander BEFORE upgrading the Kubernetes version (or Konvoy version for Managed Konvoy clusters) in attached clusters, due to the previous versions' incompatibility with 1.22.</p>

## Prerequisites

- [Download][download_binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle].  
- For air-gapped environments only: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the Kommander application definitions:

```bash

> wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz"
```

1.  If the upgrade fails, run the following command to get more information on the upgrade process:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander -v/verbose
    ```

1.  For Enterprise customers (multi-cluster environment): Upgrade your additional [Workspaces][upgrade_workspaces] on a per-Workspace basis to upgrade the Platform Applications on other clusters than the Management Cluster. 
    For Essential customers (single-cluster environment): Proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade].

You can always go back to the [DKP Upgrade overview][dkp_upgrade], to review the next steps depending on your environment and license type.

[download_binary]: ../../download/
[AKS]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster
[AWS]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/aws/advanced/update/
[Azure]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/azure/advanced/update/
[EKS]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html
[pre_provisioned]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/pre-provisioned/upgrade/control-plane/
[k8s_access_to_clusters]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/

> [upgrade_workspaces]: ../../workspaces/applications/catalog-applications/

Author: ```suggestion
[upgrade_workspaces]: ../../cli/dkp/upgrade/workspace
```

menuWeight: 20
excerpt: Steps to upgrade Kommander via CLI
beta: false
---
 
This section describes how to upgrade your Kommander Management cluster and all Platform Applications to their latest versions in networked, air-gapped and on-prem environments. To prevent compatibility issues, you must first upgrade Kommander on your Management Cluster before upgrading to DKP.

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE: </strong>It is important you upgrade Kommander BEFORE upgrading the Kubernetes version (or Konvoy version for Managed Konvoy clusters) in attached clusters, due to the previous versions' incompatibility with 1.22.</p>

## Prerequisites

- [Download][download_binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.  

> - For air-gapped environments only: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]

Reviewer: one thing I'm wondering is should we link here as well https://dev-docs.d2iq.com/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/catalog/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry

In 2.2, since catalog applications is an enterprise only feature, we had to move them to a separate install page 😞

Author: ```suggestion
- For air-gapped environments with DKP Catalog Applications (multi-cluster): [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images_catalog]
- For air-gapped environments without DKP Catalog Applications: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]
```

- For air-gapped environments only: 
  
  Download the Kommander application definitions:

  ```bash
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz"
  ```
  
  Download the Kommander charts bundle:

  ```bash

>   wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle-v2.2.0.tar.gz"
```

  ```
  

>   If you have any Catalog Applications, download the Catalog Application charts bundle:

Reviewer 3: this is specific to DKP catalog 
```suggestion
  If you have any DKP Catalog Applications, download the DKP Catalog Application charts bundle:
```

  ```bash

>   wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-catalog-applications-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-catalog-applications-charts-bundle-v2.2.0.tar.gz"
```

  ```

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s_access_to_clusters].

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash

>     dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_v.2.2.0.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_v.2.2.0.tar.gz

Author: ```suggestion
    dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle-v.2.2.0.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_v.2.2.0.tar.gz
```

    For Essential customers (single-cluster environment): Proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade].

You can always go back to the [DKP Upgrade overview][dkp_upgrade], to review the next steps depending on your environment and license type.

[download_binary]: ../../download/
[AKS]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster
[AWS]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/aws/advanced/update/
[Azure]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/azure/advanced/update/
[EKS]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html
[pre_provisioned]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/pre-provisioned/upgrade/control-plane/
[k8s_access_to_clusters]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/
[upgrade_workspaces]: ../../cli/dkp/upgrade/workspace
[release_notes]: ../../release-notes/
[konvoy_upgrade]: /dkp/kommander/2.2/dkp-upgrade/upgrade-konvoy/
[load_images]: ../../install/air-gapped/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry

> [dkp_upgrade]: ../../dkp-upgrade/

Author: ```suggestion
[dkp_upgrade]: ../../dkp-upgrade/
[load_images_catalog]: ../../install/air-gapped/catalog/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry
```

menuWeight: 20
excerpt: Steps to upgrade Kommander via CLI
beta: false
---
 

> This section describes how to upgrade your Kommander Management cluster and all Platform Applications to their latest versions in networked, air-gapped and on-prem environments. To prevent compatibility issues, you must first upgrade Kommander on your Management Cluster before upgrading to DKP.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This section describes how to upgrade your Kommander Management cluster and all Platform Applications to their supported versions in networked, air-gapped, and on-prem environments. To prevent compatibility issues, you must first upgrade Kommander on your Management Cluster before upgrading to DKP.
```

-   For air-gapped environments **without** DKP Catalog Applications: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]
-   For air-gapped environments only:
  
  Download the Kommander application definitions:

  ```bash
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz"
  ```
  
  Download the Kommander charts bundle:

  ```bash
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle-v2.2.0.tar.gz"
  ```
  
  If you have any DKP Catalog Applications, download the DKP Catalog Application charts bundle:

  ```bash
  wget "https://downloads.d2iq.com/dkp/v2.2.0/dkp-catalog-applications-charts-bundle-v2.2.0.tar.gz"
  ```

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s_access_to_clusters].

> <p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> As stated earlier, an alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>
```

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle dkp-kommander-charts-bundle-v.2.2.0.tar.gz --kommander-applications-repository kommander-applications_v.2.2.0.tar.gz
    ```

    For non air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander 
    ```

    An output similar to this appears: 
    
    ```bash
    $ dkp upgrade kommander  --kommander-applications-repository ~/work/git_repos/kommander-applications
    ✓ Ensuring upgrading conditions are met
    ✓ Ensuring application definitions are updated
    ✓ Ensuring helm-mirror implementation is migrated to chartmuseum
    ```

1.  If the upgrade fails, run the following command to get more information on the upgrade process:

    ```bash

>     dkp upgrade kommander -v

Author: ```suggestion
    dkp upgrade kommander -v 4
```

>     dkp upgrade kommander -v/verbose

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    dkp upgrade kommander -v
```

>     dkp upgrade kommander -v/verbose

Author: ```suggestion
    dkp upgrade kommander -v 4
```

    ```

1.  For Enterprise customers (multi-cluster environment): Upgrade your additional [Workspaces][upgrade_workspaces] on a per-Workspace basis to upgrade the Platform Applications on other clusters than the Management Cluster. 
    For Essential customers (single-cluster environment): Proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade].

You can always go back to the [DKP Upgrade overview][dkp_upgrade], to review the next steps depending on your environment and license type.

[download_binary]: ../../download/
[AKS]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster
[AWS]: ../../../../konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/aws/advanced/update/
[Azure]: ../../../../konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/azure/advanced/update/
[EKS]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html
[pre_provisioned]: ../../../../konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/pre-provisioned/upgrade/control-plane/
[k8s_access_to_clusters]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/
[upgrade_workspaces]: ../../cli/dkp/upgrade/workspace
[release_notes]: ../../release-notes/
[konvoy_upgrade]: ../upgrade-konvoy/

> [load_images]: ../../install/air-gapped/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry

Author: ```suggestion
[load_images]: ../../install/air-gapped/
```

[dkp_upgrade]: ../../dkp-upgrade/

> [load_images_catalog]: ../../install/air-gapped/catalog/#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry

Author: ```suggestion
[load_images_catalog]: ../../install/air-gapped/catalog/
```

## Prerequisites

- [Download][download_binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle].  

## For air-gapped environments only: Load the Docker images into your Docker registry

> 1.  Download the image bundle file:

Reviewer 7: I think this is already documented elsewhere, so you should take this download out and just point to the existing topic.

- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.
- Download the following air-gapped bundles: [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle]. **Skip this if you are not running in an air-gapped environment**.  

### Load the Docker images into your Docker registry (skip this section if you are running in an air-gapped environment)

1.  Download the image bundle file:

    ```bash
    wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/kommander_image_bundle_v2.2.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz" -O kommander-image-bundle.tar.gz
    ```

1.  Place the bundle in a location where you can load and push the images to your private Docker registry.

> 1.  Ensure you set the `REGISTRY_URL` and `AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE` variable appropriately, then use the following script to load the air-gapped image bundle:

Reviewer 8: Do we have a Jira somewhere that automates it in the CLI? If not, I can create one. IIRC we had something similar in CLI in konvoy 1.x that was automating it.

Reviewer 5: I don't think we can change this flow at this point in 2.2 so it would have to be done in 2.3.

Reviewer 9: This whole section is different, no need for the script below - docs site is already updated - see https://github.com/mesosphere/dcos-docs-site/blob/main/pages/dkp/kommander/2.2/install/air-gapped/index.md#load-the-docker-images-into-your-docker-registry and use the same wording.

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s_access_to_clusters].

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle bundle.tar.gz
    ```

    For non air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander
    ```

    <--! A confirmation message appears once upgrade is complete.--! >

1.  < --!Pending step: if confirmation message cannot be added on time, document a way to check the status of the upgrade in Management Cluster. --! >

> 1.  Upgrade your additional [Workspaces][upgrade_workspaces] on a per-Workspace basis to upgrade the Platform Applications on other clusters than the Management Cluster. Do this only if your environment has additional Workspaces (with Managed and Attached clusters). Otherwise, proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade]. < --! we need to reference this file once it is created-->

Reviewer 8: > Do this only if your environment has additional Workspaces

I do not quite understand this sentence - the managed cluster belongs to it's own workspace and IIRC customers should not be using it for other clusters.

Reviewer 8: Also, do we plan to add instructions on how to do the workspaces upgrade - i.e. which commands to call?

Author: @vespian With this sentence, I was trying to state that this is only necessary in a multi-cluster environment. But I agree that this only adds more confusion.  How about the following? 
```suggestion
1.  For Enterprise customers: Upgrade your additional [Workspaces][upgrade_workspaces] on a per-Workspace basis to upgrade the Platform Applications on other clusters than the Management Cluster. 
For Essential customers: Proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade]. < --! we need to reference this file once it is created-->
```
And yes, we are working on a separate document where the Workspace Upgrade will live.

Reviewer 8: > For Enterprise customers: Upgrade your additional [Workspaces][upgrade_workspaces] on a per-Workspace basis to upgrade the Platform Applications on other clusters than the Management Cluster. 

lgtm

> For Essential customers: Proceed with the [Konvoy Upgrade][konvoy_upgrade]. < --! we need to reference this file once it is created-->

So konvoy upgrade should happen after kommander upgrade?

Author: AFAIK, in a single-cluster experience, yes. / In a multi-cluster experience, all apps (platform, catalog) in non-management clusters must be upgraded first. That is why I would like to point to different documentation depending on the license model. (Essential customers can upgrade Konvoy next, but Enterprise customers have to follow other steps first)

- [Download][download-binary] and install the latest DKP CLI binary on your computer.
- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre-provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release-notes] that are part of this upgrade.

> - Download the following air-gapped bundles: [images bundle][images-bundle], [charts bundle][charts-bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat-apps-bundle]. **Skip this if you are not running in an air-gapped environment**.  

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **This step is only necessary when you are running in an air-gapped environment** Download the following air-gapped bundles: [images bundle][images-bundle], [charts bundle][charts-bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat-apps-bundle].  
```
I find it more convenient from a user's perspective to tell them the conditions under which they need to conduct a certain step prior to telling them the steps. Otherwise users might read through the steps, download the bundles and only then see they wouldn't have had to do it in the first place. Plus, I ridded the sentence of a negation. 😊

Reviewer 5: Yes, much more concise!

> ### Load the Docker images into your Docker registry (skip this section if you are running in an air-gapped environment)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Load the Docker images into your Docker registry (skip this section if you are not running in an air-gapped environment)
```
If you agree with my suggestion above we should have the same wording as above, too:
```suggestion
### (This step is only necessary when you are running in an air-gapped environment) Load the Docker images into your Docker registry

1.  Download the image bundle file:

    ```bash

>     wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/kommander_image_bundle_v2.2.0_linux_amd64.tar" -O kommander-image-bundle.tar

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/kommander_image_bundle_v2.2.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz" -O kommander-image-bundle.tar.gz
```

    ```

> 1.  Place the bundle in a location where you can load and push the images to your private Docker registry.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1.  Place the bundle in a location from where you can load and push the images to your private Docker registry.
```
?

Reviewer 9: Actually you don't need to load them any more...

```suggestion
1.  Place the bundle in a location from where you can push the images to your private Docker registry.
```

1.  Ensure you set the `REGISTRY_URL` and `AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE` variable appropriately, then use the following script to load the air-gapped image bundle:

    ```bash
    #!/usr/bin/env bash
    set -euo pipefail
    IFS=$'\n\t'

>     readonly AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE=${AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE:-"kommander-image-bundle.tar"}

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    readonly AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE=${AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE:-"kommander-image-bundle.tar.gz"}
```

    done < <(tar xfO "${AIRGAPPED_TAR_FILE}" "index.json" | grep -oP '(?<="io.containerd.image.name":").*?(?=",)')
    ```

Based on the network latency between the environment of script execution and the docker registry, it can take a while to upload all the images to your image registry.

## Upgrade Kommander

Before running the following command, ensure that your `dkp` configuration **references the Kommander Management cluster**, otherwise it attempts to run the upgrade on the bootstrap cluster. You can do this by setting the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable [to the appropriate kubeconfig file's location][k8s-access-to-clusters].

<p class="message--note"><strong>NOTE:</strong> An alternative to initializing the KUBECONFIG environment variable as stated earlier is to use the <code>–kubeconfig=cluster_name.conf</code> flag. This ensures that Kommander upgrades on the workload cluster.</p>

1.  Use the DKP CLI to upgrade Kommander and all the Platform Applications in the Management Cluster:

    For air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander --charts-bundle bundle.tar.gz
    ```

    For non air-gapped:

    ```bash
    dkp upgrade kommander
    ```

>     <--! A confirmation message appears once upgrade is complete.--! >

Author: @gracedo , do we have an update on this?

Reviewer 8: If the error happened, the upgrade process is going to be terminated. Otherwise the CLI will just finish with `0` exist status. 

Do mean here adding an extra message that will confirm that the upgrade succeeded as well?

Reviewer 7: @vespian we need to add the output here. AND we need to tell them how to troubleshoot if this doesn't work. Like what would a failure output look like? then what are the steps to fix that?

Reviewer 8: Comman exists with non-zero exit status (in this case with `1`)

> 1.  < --!Pending step: if confirmation message cannot be added on time, document a way to check the status of the upgrade in Management Cluster. --! >

Author: @gracedo , same here. Could you please provide the steps/workaround?

Reviewer 7: @gracedo we need output please.

- Ensure you are on DKP version 2.1 or 2.1.1 and Kubernetes version 1.21.
- If you have attached clusters, ensure they are on Kubernetes versions 1.19, 1.20 or 1.21. To upgrade your Kubernetes version, refer to the appropriate documentation for your environment: [AKS][AKS], [AWS][AWS], [Azure][Azure], [EKS][EKS], [pre-provisioned][pre_provisioned].
- Review the [Platform Application version updates][release_notes] that are part of this upgrade.
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the [images bundle][images_bundle], [charts bundle][charts_bundle] and [Catalog Application charts bundle][cat_apps_bundle].  
- For air-gapped environments only: [Load the Docker images into your Docker registry][load_images]
- For air-gapped environments only: Download the Kommander charts bundle: 

```bash

> wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_${VERSION}.tar.gz"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz"
```
not sure where we landed with this but if we don't provide a way to set `$VERSION` anywhere before this step we should just use the actual version here.

```

- For air-gapped environments only: Download the Kommander application definitions:

```bash

> wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/kommander-applications_${VERSION}.tar.gz"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
wget "https://downloads.mesosphere.com/dkp/kommander-applications_v2.2.0.tar.gz"
```

[EKS]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html
[pre-provisioned]: /dkp/konvoy/2.2/choose-infrastructure/pre-provisioned/upgrade/control-plane/
[k8s-access-to-clusters]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/
[upgrade-workspaces]: ../../workspaces/applications/catalog-applications/
[release-notes]: ../../release-notes/

> [images-bundle]: /downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/kommander_image_bundle_v2.2.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
> [charts-bundle]: /downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz
> [cat-apps-bundle]: /downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/dkp-catalog-applications-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[images-bundle]: https://downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/kommander_image_bundle_v2.2.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
[charts-bundle]: https://downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/dkp-kommander-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz
[cat-apps-bundle]: https://downloads.mesosphere.io/kommander/airgapped/v2.2.0/dkp-catalog-applications-charts-bundle_v2.2.0.tar.gz
```
